From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the daily.
[Music]
Over the weekend, Russia bombarded
Ukraine with the largest drone assault
in the war thus far. It's the latest in
a relentless Russian offensive that
keeps escalating despite President
Trump's efforts to negotiate peace.
Today, my colleague Anatoli Kermanay on
the economic war machine that's driving
Russia's success on the battlefield and
making it so hard for anyone to get
Putin to back down.
[Applause]
[Music]
It's Tuesday, September 9th.
>> Anatoli, welcome to the show.
>> Thanks for having me. You know, I first
met you in Mexico. We were both there as
correspondents, but you left and for the
last couple of years, you've been
reporting on Russia, which is
incidentally where you grew up. And you
told me at one point that you felt
people had an incomplete picture of this
war, because they really weren't
understanding the forces inside Russia
that were driving Putin and enabling his
ambitions on the battlefield. That's
right, Natalie. I think the images that
the world saw in the first months, the
first year of this war pointed to
Russia's imminent collapse. You know,
the conversations that were being had in
diplomatic dinners, receptions in the
west at the time were about collapse.
You know, it wasn't just that the
invasion of Ukraine will fail, that
Russia is a state is about to
disintegrate, leading to downfall of
Putin and and perhaps even the ends of
Russian nation states and the current
borders as we know it. And I always felt
this was triumphalist from a western
perspective, from perspective of
Russia's adversaries. and they were
missing the broader picture and the
forces that Putin was mastering to stay
in this fight. And then you fast forward
to today and you see Putin hobnobin with
Trump in Alaska on US soil getting red
carpet rolled out to him. You see him
traveling to China and meeting with
leaders of developing worlds. You see
just the confidence that he exudes when
he speaks. And Russia has not won. it is
not about to receive Ukrainian
capitulation, but Putin is acting that
he's on course for victory. So, I set
out to try to explain to our readers
what forces, what processes led Russia
to be where it is today, led Putin to be
where he is today.
And let me just say, let me just
acknowledge your reporting has really
changed the way I've been thinking about
this war and about Russia because it's
shown just how much Putin has turned
things around and in his favor over the
last couple of years. So I want to start
there. What is the evidence that Putin
has gained the upper hand in this war?
>> First of all, it's the territory.
Russia's inching forward every month.
These are not major breakthroughs, but
in a war of attrition in in a war that's
largely been deadlocked, the Russian
advances over the course of the summer
offensive have been significant. But
underneath these territorial changes,
these advances lay, I think, even larger
trends. And the biggest among these
trends is the fact that every day more
Russian troops are facing fewer
Ukrainian defenders. The balance of
forces is heading in a directions that
is not sustainable for Ukrainian
defenses at this stage. Russia has also
caught up with Ukraine and in some cases
overtook Ukraine in terms of production
of drones, crucial weapon of this war
and it is winning the economic war. It
is raising and throwing into the war
more money than Ukraine is able to. So
in the war of attrition which is frankly
the war of resources it's it's a war who
can mobilize and use their resources
more efficiently than the enemy. Russia
is winning which means that is a matter
of time if the current trends continue
that Russia will achieve the victory it
is looking for.
>> So you're describing success on many
fronts for Russia. Let's look under the
hood there. How did Putin pull this off?
The two major columns of his if not
success then his his ability to stay in
a fight is men and money. His ability to
recruit enough men and throw into battle
and his ability to continue earning
revenues that power his war machine. And
these are the two pillars that have
enabled him to be where he is today and
dictate his terms.
>> Okay. So walk me through when this
turnaround started. The crucial moment
came in September 2022.
>> Military experts say President Vladimir
Putin's war in Ukraine has not gone
according to plan.
>> At the time, Russia was on the verge of
complete collapse.
>> Ukrainian resistance is defying
expectations and complicating the
Kremlin's efforts to seize the country.
>> Its forces had to retreat from Ukraine
capital Kiev. They would take in huge
losses. the army was running out of men,
was running out of weapons, and it
seemed like this this war was about to
end.
And then Putin did something that no one
expected.
[Music]
Russian President Vladimir Putin says he
has signed a decree ordering the partial
military mobilization of Russia's armed
forces beginning today.
>> He called the first military draft in
Russia since World War II, drafting
about 300,000 men
>> from Moscow to Siberia.
anger growing and hundreds arrested.
>> And this was a tremendously disruptive
political event in Russia.
>> Recruiters were just grabbing men from
the streets, going to people's homes.
>> Hundreds of thousands escaping the
fighting in Ukraine, fleeing the draft
at home by flooding the border into
Georgia.
>> Hundreds of thousands of young Russian
men fled the country to avoid being
drafted, dealing a massive blow to the
Russian economy.
It was a hugely hugely unpopular moments
in Russian society and polls
showed that this measure caused the
biggest spike of of discontent, the
biggest spike in fear in Russian years.
But Putin wrote it out. He wrote out the
initial discontent.
[Music]
>> Russian attacks in Ukraine are getting
more intense. Ukrainian.
>> Russia has been able to make advances
over the past few months.
>> And those 300,000 men, despite being
poorly trained, despite being
inexperienced and in poor health, they
were able to plug the gaps in Russian
lines and stabilize the battlefield.
>> Hundreds of civilians are fleeing as
Russian forces pound populated areas
with mortars and artillery.
So Putin drafts all these men and the
move actually pays off in that it saves
Russia from defeat in this really
critical moment. But at the same time,
Russians really hate this. They really
resent the draft. I mean, even if you
are leading an authoritarian system, you
don't want to anger this many people,
right? It's just not good politically.
And I'm assuming that it's not
sustainable long term.
>> That's absolutely right, Natalie. And
Putin was able to stumble upon a
solution. And the solution was offering
man a lot of money to fight. And in one
of the most unequal countries on earth,
giving men at the margins of Russian
society an opportunity to become heroes,
to prove their worth to themselves, to
their families and their communities.
and combined this created a whole new
recruitment strategy that allowed Putin
to replace the draft with volunteers.
>> Okay, talk to me about that recruitment
strategy. Just to start, how much money
are we talking about?
>> We're talking about life-changing money
on signing up. A Russian man today would
receive about $65,000
as a bonus, as a signing up bonus. Then
every month he would receive about
$3,000 salary. This is 10 times more
that what Russian soldiers would be
receiving before this war. And this is
just the beginning, Natalie. A Russian
soldier would receive extra payments for
absolutely everything that he does on
the battlefield from taking territory to
blowing up enemy equipment to earning
medals.
>> You're saying that the soldiers get a
specific amount of money for each of
those things. Achievements on the
battlefield come with payouts. Specific
payouts.
>> Absolutely. Everything comes with a
specific payout. And this extends to
injuries and death. There are very
detailed specific payments associated
with every injury from losing the foods
to receiving a skull injury. And even
when a person dies, his family is
assured a very large payout between 50
and $100,000. The bottom line is that
military service, service in this war
has given opportunity to workingclass
Russian men to earn sums that would be
completely unimaginable for them in the
civilian life that they would never be
able to earn for the rest of their
working life career. It was a jackpot,
you know, a fouian deal, so to speak,
that gave these men a tickets to the
middle class in return for sacrificing
their health and possibly life. Hm.
>> And this urge has been very effectively
exploited by the Russian propaganda.
>> When you look at the recruitment ads put
out by Ministry of Defense and private
middleman,
>> there was a infamous ad recently that
talked about, you know, what are men
made of? Are they made from?
the smoothies and tattoos and piercings.
Like, no.
Our men are made from bravery and
courage and honor.
And you know, these are just really
effective tools for people searching for
meaning, searching for a purpose today.
And did you talk to people who had
volunteered who' taken these payments?
>> Yes, many of them. The most striking
story I heard was from a man called
Vladislav who was speaking to us from a
hospital bed. He lost his foot storming
Ukrainian trenches earlier this year and
he's 33 years old. And before the war,
he worked at a Sunflower oil plants. you
know, a working-class job in a
provincial city in western Russia where
he was earning about the equivalent of
$300 a month. And he he wanted something
more. He wanted to to become a bread
winner, to become someone respected by
by his relatives. And when we asked them
how much money he's he's receiving or
how he's doing, what really
surprised perhaps shocked me was just
this instant recall in in the way that
Vladislav has been able to just rattle
off the numbers that he expected to
receive. The the money that he was
convinced was due to him. It was about
$65,000 from a local governor, and about
$28,000 from a state insurance company,
$47,000 more from a defense ministry. It
was this whole list of payments from all
these different agencies involved in
Russia's war effort that were due to
Vladislav. And even before he received
this injury, the various payments
associated with the salary have
completely transformed his life. And
even though he will not be able to walk
again in the same way, his life will
never be the same. He considered this a
deal that was worth taking because it
gave his family a life that he would
have never been able to provide it
otherwise with.
>> The story shows how the money can really
just radically change a human being's
fortunes. It also shows how
transactional the recruitment has
become. The men signing up under this
new system, they aren't motivated, it
sounds like, by patriotism, feelalty to
the cause. They're fighting for money.
They're like mercenaries.
>> That's right. And this has political
benefits for Putin because a man who
signs up for money receives no pity,
receives no consolation from a wider
society. If he dies, this does not cause
the same level of social upheaval that
would accompany the death of drafties of
men who were dragged off the street
because they all have families. They all
have loved ones that are are waiting for
them and and and consider it the state's
duty to take care of them. But if you
willingly sign up to fight and die in
return for money, that this is a choice
you made. And this explains the ease
with which Putin has been able to send
hundreds of thousands of men to their
death.
>> So you're saying it basically is a way
of potentially limiting unrest over the
war. How many people how many men has
the Russian government been able to
recruit with this strategy? Since being
introduced in late 2022, Russia's has
been recruiting about thousand soldiers
a day. Wow.
>> And this is that amount that not only
has allowed Russia to replenish its
losses, but also to create new units,
new divisions, actually grow the size of
its force beyond the initial army that
invaded Ukraine. At a thousand a day,
we're now talking about like hundreds of
thousands of people who've been
recruited like this. That's a lot of
people to give life-changing money to to
lift into the middle class. How on earth
is Putin paying for this?
>> Well, what separates Putin from other
autocrats that you and me, Natalie, have
covered is that Putin understands the
economy, understands the importance of
the economy, and has respects for the
laws of supply and demand.
and he has been saving money and
shielding Russian economy from the
effect of the sanctions because he has
been preparing for this moment for a
very long time.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Anatoli, you said Putin has been
preparing for this for a long time and
that he understands the economy. What
exactly do you mean by that?
So Putin comes to power in 99. His
ascendancy coincides with a rise in
global oil prices. So all of a sudden
all these billions and billions of
dollars are flooding into the country
and Putin decides to avoid the fades of
the previous governments. He starts
saving. He institutes a very
economically conservative policy
implemented by western influenced
technocrat economists in his government
that keeps spending to a minimum. He
basically tightens the purse strings and
he starts running a very tight shop. So
he starts this war with a very strong
economic foundation and he unties this
purse strings. All of a sudden, all this
money that has been saved up over years,
decades starts flooding in to the
country. We have seen the biggest
increase in public spending in Russia
since the country became independent in
1991. The money has flooded the economy.
And this money has not only propelled
the the war machine, it has flooded the
broader economy, creating a sense of
well-being, keeping people content,
keeping people consuming, which means
that if you're not directly involved in
the horrors of the war, chances are that
you're living better today than you have
lived before the invasion, which has
dramatically reduced social tensions in
the country and the political pressure
Putin may have felt to end this war.
>> Got it. Putin's been saving this whole
time and then the moment comes and he
can press go on this war machine. But
what about the sanctions from the US and
these other countries? Have those just
not been that effective at hurting
Russia's economy?
>> They have not been effective enough.
They have not closed Russia's ability to
continue selling its natural resources.
And the main reason for that, Natalie,
is that these very comprehensive Western
sanctions have never really been
accepted or picked up by the rest of the
world, by the developing countries, but
what we call the global south. out of
sheer self-interest or perhaps sympathy
with with Russia's cause, they have
continued doing business with Russia,
which has allowed Putin to shift its
customers to find new customers in Asia
to continue selling its oil and natural
gas just in the other direction of the
world.
>> And the countries in Asia that are
buying this oil are China and India
primarily, right?
>> That's right. Russia's main oil
customers today are China and India. And
this is a very interesting case Natalie
because while China has for for decades
been a very important economic partner
of Russia before the war India has
barely bought any Russian oil and today
Russia accounts for about 40% of India's
oil imports and this very rapid change
happened almost exclusively out of
India's economic self-interest. it is
able to buy Russian oil at a cheaper
price than it can get elsewhere because
Russia's limited ability to to find
customers. And this sort of allows
Russia to still sell its soil despite
all the restrictions.
>> But isn't President Trump trying to put
more pressure on this source of money?
He just doubled tariffs on India and and
said it was because of India buying
Russian oil. Could that put a dent in
Russia's war chest?
>> Not in a major way. What we see in so
far is that India has promised to
continue buying Russian oil and has has
rejected basically Trump's ultimatums
Trump bullying economic bullying you can
say and we seeing that Trump's policies
on tariffs on global trade are actually
driving many countries if not towards
support for Russia then at least
tolerance of trade with Russia that it's
creating all these new economics open
that Russia is able to exploit and fund
this war.
>> So, if the gravy train from China and
India hasn't stopped and the sanctions
aren't slowing Putin down that much, how
much runway does that give him to keep
fighting this war? Like, how much longer
can he last? At some point, does the
money or do the potential recruits dry
up? Ukraine's biggest hope today,
the biggest hope of its Western allies
is that Russia will exhaust itself and
run out of men and money to fight this
war. But Putin is betting that he can
outlast his enemies, that he has more
resources and more men to to fight for
longer than Ukraine. At the current
pace, perhaps he has another year to
sustain the fighting at the at the
current level. And but he's he's betting
it will be enough. There's a Russian
proverb actually, you know, we say in
Russia, you don't need to outrun the
bear, you need to outrun your friend.
>> What an image.
>> There's a lot of bears in Russia and not
a lot of friends. Um, and to paraphrase
it for this war, you don't need to run
the bear, you need to run your enemy.
And this is what ultimately drives
Putin's decision to carry on this war
despite of lack of major breakthroughs.
And just to pull back for a second, do
you think that Putin's strength in the
war, that Russia's strength on the
battlefield is affecting the way that
other countries, Europe and the US, for
example, are approaching this war and
the efforts to end it?
>> Absolutely. And I think this change has
massively accelerated since Trump's
return to power because until very
recently until a few months ago the west
has broadly just supported whatever Ke's
position was. The main line was that we
stand with KF no matter what we will
support the government of Kim no matter
what and whatever KES wants to negotiate
that is our position. Under Trump, this
has begun to change and the the US uh
has forced in a way the other western
nations to start considering Russia's
demands, to start considering Russian's
position and taking it into account. And
frankly, that means accepting the fact
that as a country that's winning on the
battlefield, it has no incentives to
stop fighting until it believes that its
demands have been met.
>> It's interesting. You know, I think a
lot of people view the way that Trump is
treating Putin's demands, being very
open to them as a sign that, you know,
he has been friendly with Putin. He's
been friendly with Russia. This is that.
And it may be that, but also what you're
saying is that Trump is recognizing
Russia's strength in this war. He's
recognizing the power dynamics that are
at play here.
>> That's right. At the end of the day,
Trump wants to end this war and he
recognizes that to end the war, he must
take Russia's demands into account. By
now, the US and gradually its European
allies have accepted that Russia will
keep at least some of the territory that
it has conquered in Ukraine. And to
convince KF to accept such a deal, such
a proposition, they need to provide it
with assurances that it will be safe
from future attack. So just in a matter
of a few weeks, we have moved from
complete rejection from any territorial
concessions to creating conditions that
would make it bearable for the
government in KF to accept these
territorial losses.
>> So both on the global stage and at home,
Putin seems to be winning in a sense.
Even though Russia hasn't defeated
Ukraine, it also hasn't been crushed by
the might of the Western world.
But is there any downside to Putin's
strategy in this war? How are you
thinking about the potential risks here?
The cost of this war will be felt by
generations of Russians to come. And we
are talking about much more than just
demographical losses. that the loss of
hundreds of thousands of Russian men who
will not return from the battlefield,
will not return to their workplaces and
and will not create new families. There
are tremendous economic and social costs
of this war. Many of them are reversible
on the economy. Russia has bled its
industry dry to fund its invasion. It
has severed its ties with the west and
it has created an economy that has
become addicted to military spending. An
economy where today only military
production is growing at the expense of
everything else which military
production that has crowded out all the
other industries. the situation that we
saw in the Soviet Union where tanks and
bullets came at the cost of toilet paper
and food and this addiction to military
spending will not disappear after the
fighting stops.
>> Right. Turning off this war machine will
be painful.
>> That's right. And on the social front,
arguably the consequences would be even
greater. We are going to see hundreds of
thousands of Russian men returning from
a battlefield expecting to be treated
like heroes and expecting to continue
receiving the myriad of financial
entitlements that they and their
families have gotten used to in the
years of fighting. And it's very
unlikely that the Russian society will
receive them as heroes. And it's also
very unlikely that the Russian state
will be able to continue funding their
lifestyles, fighting this entitlements
that they have received during the
fighting. And this is likely to cause
tremendous amount of social discontent.
>> The
war in Afghanistan that the Soviet Union
foughts in the 1980s made a great
contribution to the collapse of the
Soviet Union because the tens of
thousands of soldiers that came back
from Afghanistan did not find a place in
new society. have found themselves
unwanted and unable to integrate. And
the force, the Russ, the Soviet force
that returned from Afghanistan is just a
tiny fraction of the hundreds of
thousands of soldiers that are currently
fighting in Ukraine and will eventually
come back home to build a new life.
>> You're talking about a level of social
disruption potentially that the country
just hasn't seen in decades,
>> I would say. You know, I think it's just
very difficult to predict the political
cost of Russia's climb down from this
war.
When I'm thinking about the future of
Russia as a Russian right now, to me,
the irony, the evil irony you could
perhaps call is that Putin is ultimately
fighting this war to restore Russia to a
superpower status, to make it great
again. And the changes that I see
actually Russia may in the long run very
much prove to emerge a shadow of itself.
It will be a country that will be a lot
more internationally isolated, a lot
more techratic and uh with a lot fewer
means of real growth and developments.
So the current stability then that we
see in Russia, you know, people are just
walking around the streets, you know,
without any concern for this war. I
think there's a tsunami of upheaval that
will be coming after this war is over
that is really difficult to comprehend
just the scale of it or what Russian
state, Russian society, Russian people
are facing. So I think the victory that
Putin is on course for achieving in
Ukraine in the long run may really
show its shallowess and confine Russia
to a perpetual decline as opposed to
glory that he's envisioning.
Anatoli, thanks so much.
>> Thanks for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Monday, the Trump administration won
two victories from the Supreme Court. In
a 6-3 ruling, the court's conservative
majority lifted a lower court order that
had prohibited federal agents from
indiscriminately stopping immigrants on
the streets of Los Angeles based on
their skin color and accents.
The original order had found that such
stops violated the Fourth Amendment, but
the Supreme Court disagreed and as a
result such stops can now resume despite
growing evidence that the mass agents
carrying them out have repeatedly swept
up American citizens.
In the second ruling, Chief Justice John
Roberts, acting on his own, temporarily
allowed President Trump to remove a
Democratic member of the Federal Trade
Commission despite statutes designed to
shield such commissioners from political
interference.
The full court is expected to issue a
final ruling on the case in the coming
weeks.
and congressional Democrats have
released the image of a sexually
suggestive letter and drawing apparently
signed by President Trump and given to
Jeffrey Epstein for his 50th birthday in
2003.
The image contradicted Trump, who's
repeatedly said that it does not exist.
When the Wall Street Journal first
reported on the letter, which imagines a
conversation between Trump and Epstein
framed by the drawing of a woman's naked
body, Trump called it fake and
immediately sued the journal for
defamation.
Today's episode was produced by Claire
Tennisar, Asta Chathur, Stella Tan, and
Nina Feldman. It was edited by Lisa Chow
and Chris Hel and was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroek. See you tomorrow.
[Music]